---
title: Branching Out
order: 7
byline: by Flori Tulli
layout: essay
permalink: /branching-out.html
---

Whereas research papers can be confined to universities, databases, and academic research, art can branch out in multiple directions and reach more audiences. Art's ability to act as a translator for information, a visual representation of complex topics, helps to further motivate viewer discourse. I found Andrew Brown's book _Art & Ecology Now_ extremely useful for learning about many examples of ecological art and their successes with engaging communities. He prefaces that "From being a peripheral activity, art that seeks to ask searching questions about the environment is now firmly center stage, at once responding to and shaping debates in broader society" (6). While an artist can have biases or intention behind a piece--such as my project has--their ultimate goal is to get viewers thinking about subjects from a different perspective. With wolf reintroduction, a topic with many polarized stances, it's important to me that viewers can see the subject from multiple viewpoints and think outside their own stances. 

Furthermore, ecological art requires research and collaboration between artists and specialists from other fields. Brown elaborates that "Often, the artists producing these works do so in collaboration with others, undertaking complex projects with specialists from other disciplines, such as botanists, zoologists, ecologists, geologists, meteorologists, oceanographers, architects, engineers and urban planners, as well as the community members and the environment activists." Once again, this is where using multiple modes can help translate complex topics--by reshaping the boundaries of conveying information, perhaps we can find more solutions. 

In creating this project, I not only had to independently research a multitude of views and genres but also had to consult professors from different fields, speak with local Idahoans and members of the Idaho Wolf Project, and collaborate with CDIL about website creation. My project's goal of taking a polarizing issue and blurring lines between different viewpoints can help with "The redefinition of national, cultural, geographical and social divisions, and the blurring or redrawing of boundaries between what have conventionally been considered opposites" (7). Brown further argues that artists "can engage local communities and garner broad support in ways that science alone can rarely do. They can offer tools for reflection, discussion, awareness, and action that lead to new ways of thinking about and of being in the world. And they can bring about real change" (8). In this way, art and multimodality can accomplish what writing or science alone cannot--larger engagement. Artists do not provide definite answers--they pose questions. By creating an art piece, I have sought to allow my audiences to access an investigative window into the topic of wolf reintroduction.  

If my art piece is a window, then a website would be the landscape beyond immediate surroundings. By building an accompanying website, I not only present and preserve further channels of investigation for audiences to explore but also allow my audience to directly interact with the information. Rather than limit the topic to one perspective--my own art--albeit a collage of multiple perspectives--I aim to compile and branch the multitudes of discourses from the visual piece itself. We perceive the world through many simultaneous senses, which multimodality helps us express and explore. In the case of multimodality, Alex Weik von Mossner reflects upon the effectiveness of film: "The multimodal relationships between people, objects, landscapes, and our embodied brains are particularly complex in the case of film, which not only provides narrative (like literature) or visual information (like a painting) but also sound and, most importantly, motion" (53). Similar to the multiple modes used in movies, a multimodal project also provides numerous channels for understanding and connecting information. 

The physical art piece itself can visually tell the story of wolf reintroduction, showing the complex landscape of viewpoints. By adding a QR link onto to the piece, I can enable audiences can haptically engage with my project through the website--witnessing more regional Idahoan literature surrounding wolves and the process behind my project's creation. The website itself, encompassing multitudes of source types--written, audio, visual--creates a branching system of information channels. Rather than my art piece existing as a singular statement, its connection to the site makes it into more of an ecotone of discourses.  

I do not want my project to disappear into an academic echo chamber. Instead, I want it to branch out--like a living being--into a gallery, online, and the multitude of sources I have researched. I see this piece as a catalyst for conversation, a conversion point of various voices, and an accessible springboard for researchers. My aim is that audiences on all sides of wolf reintroduction can access multiple perspectives surrounding the controversy, seeing them side-by-side through an accessible space, and investigating further to find different dimensions to the topic--viewpoints they have not acknowledged before. The more angles we see, the more we can work together to find solutions and garner an understanding of the complex interconnectivity of our world.